Authoring a CUDA kernel doesn't
mean you have to reinvent
every algorithm from scratch.
CUDA offers a range of cooperative
libraries that speed up
your kernels and shorten
development time.
For example, KUB provides
general-purpose cooperative
algorithms for reductions,
prefix sums, and sorting.
Meanwhile, kubelastdx handles
cooperative linear algebra
functions, and kubfftdx
offers Cooperative.
Fourier transforms.
But what exactly does cooperative
mean in this context?
To explain what cooperative
means, let's review the
types of algorithms we've
encountered so far.
We begin with STD sort, which
is a serial algorithm.
A serial algorithm is both called
and executed by a single thread.
So if two different threads
each call a serial algorithm,
the inputs from one thread cannot
affect the outputs of the other.
Cooperative algorithms, on
the other hand, are invoked
by multiple threads and are
executed cooperatively among them.
You can imagine the input of these
cooperative algorithms as one large
virtual array and just happens to
be split among different threads.
The same goes for the output.
In the example shown, a cooperative
sort takes elements one, three
from the first thread and
two, four from the second.
After sorting cooperatively, The
first thread's output becomes 1, 2.
even though two originally
came from the second thread.
We've also used parallel
algorithms, which are called
by a single thread, but executed
by many threads behind the scenes.
From a user's perspective,
these algorithms appear serial
since they just call them
like any other function.
However, under the hood,
they distribute the work
among multiple threads to
complete the task faster.
Some examples of
parallel algorithms
we've used so far include
Thrust transform and CUB
device transform.
Now let's look more closely
at cooperative algorithms.
On the diagram, you can see how
cooperative production might work.
Here, all threads provide a single
value into cooperative reduction.
First thread contributes
zero, second one contributes
one and so forth.
Inside the cooperative algorithm,
these values are written
into shared memory.
After thread block synchronization,
a small set of threads computes
partial sums and writes them back.
After one more synchronization,
the total sum, 6 in our
simplified example, is returned
to the first thread.
Although this is a very
basic model, it illustrates
two key points about
cooperative algorithms.
One, they rely on shared memory
for data exchange between threads.
They may include
synchronization steps.
This means if any thread in
the block fails to call the
cooperative algorithm, the
entire kernel could deadlock.
Let's see how this intuition
applies to real code.
Here we have a cooperative
reduction provided by kub.
Unlike traditional function
oriented interfaces, kub exposes
its cooperative algorithms
as templated structures.
Template parameters are used
to specialize algorithms for
the problem at hand.
For example, we can specify
that we want to reduce integers
within a block of 256 threads.
Next, there's a nested temp
storage type, which specifies
the kind of temporary storage
the cooperative algorithm needs
for its internal communication.
We allocate an instance of
this type in shared memory,
then pass a reference to that
shared memory instance
When we construct the
cooperative algorithm.
Finally, member functions
provide different flavors
of a given cooperative algorithm.
Putting it all together,
usage of this cooperative
algorithm looks like this.
We instantiate block reduction
for reducing integers within
a thread block of size four.
Then allocate nest attempt
storage type in shared memory,
construct an instance of this
cooperative algorithm structure,
And finally, call a
cooperative algorithm.
CUB provides many general purpose
algorithms at a thread block level.
And one of these cooperative
algorithms is actually
a block histogram.
The block histogram structure has
a few template parameters as well.
First, we have to specify the
type of the histogram elements,
which is integer in our case.
Then we have to specify the
thread block size, like 256.
Then we also specify how many bins
each thread is going to contribute.
And lastly, we have to specify
how many bins there are
for our histogram.
Then the block histogram usage
is very similar to what we
have seen before.
In the exercise for this section,
you'll use the CUB block block
histogram algorithm in the
histogram kernel instead of
implementing it from scratch.